Hi, I'm Marcus Adams. I work in Merck's Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Division as part of the Digital
Proactive Process Analytics Group. This is our mascot, Rex. See, like many things for
our prehistoric friend, we were finding that the data, we could see it, was often just
out of reach. And that made us sad. Now we work to get that data into the hands of our
scientists and engineers at our manufacturing sites around the world.
I am incredibly honored to be here with you today. I've had the privilege of attending
RStudio Conf in the past, and I've always found it to be an incredibly enriching experience.
You get to hear about exciting new ways people are using the R language. You get to have
great conversations with wonderful members of the R community. And you get to take bets
on who will have the longest line at the book signing event. Hint, in 2020, it was not Hadley
and Chukow. Unfortunately, I can't help you with any of these things. In fact, I'm
about to show you possibly the world's most boring Shiny app. But it is a Shiny app in
production. Here it is. Text input box, paste in our search. Could have uploaded it. Too
fancy. Lock it. Check the sand text. Great. Click a button and wait some more. I could
sing for you, but my go-to karaoke song is Rap God, which is six minutes, and we shouldn't
wait that long. Great. It's done. Click a button. Download the PDF. Here it is. Here's
our report. Here's our table of contents. Quality attributes. Skip to the first one.
It's our control chart. Some run rules. Summary statistics. And histograms. Look at the distributions
before and after a process change. And I know. Why am I showing you this? This is R Markdown
101. Creating a PDF report? Are you kidding me? That's not what's important for us. What
was important for us was that this is saving tens of thousands of hours each year, the
equivalent of millions of dollars in productivity. More important is that engineers and scientists
can now use those hours for much higher value activities instead of just doing rote data
polls and visualization. Most importantly, this is what our sites needed. When we went
out to one of our largest manufacturing sites in Singapore, they told us, we can't even
think of supporting an advanced analytics project. We need to get resources off of
required activities like CPV. CPV is a continuous process verification report you just saw.
And that report is considered GMP. If you're not from pharma, that means it adheres to
good manufacturing practices. In other words, this is the kind of data and reporting that
we would submit to the FDA and other regulatory agencies around the world. This is the kind
of data and reports we would use to make release decisions that can have impact on millions
of patients around the world. And so when we think about this, we think production.
We think production plus high level of regulations. When the features may be a few and it may
seem boring, it's sort of like a transformer though. There's more than meets the eye. And
Fred Brooks in his iconic mythical man month, he describes this. He says there's this tar
pit and you start out with a program in the upper left hand corner. And this is your core
features. This is what you crank out in a weekend. But this is not what you deliver
to your end users. If you want to make a programming system, integrate that with databases, your
authentication server, that's going to take three times as much work. And if you want
to make it a programming product, document it, test it, generalize it. That's also going
to take three times as much work. And then if you want to move to a programming systems
product, what we might consider a production app, that's going to take nine times the amount
of work. So your original program, that one ninth, that one ninth, that's just your recurrent
neural network. That's only such a small part of the end application. The other 89% is what
it takes to create a reliable, secure, and maintainable app in a production environment.
Now, if you're not an app developer or you don't come from a computer science background,
you might not be familiar with the bulk of what it takes. We certainly weren't. We're
just a bunch of chemists and chemical engineers, and we're not the exception. In fact, a Birchworks
study in 2019 found that only 21% of data scientists come from a computer science background.
The rest of us, we come from places like statistics, business, economics, or the natural sciences.
Now in true Pareto fashion, luckily that 21% has done a lot of heavy lifting for us. And
for us to get to a production app, we had to learn a lot of things, but I don't have
time to share all those. Instead, I'm just going to share three of them with you today.
First, no excuses. Code like a team. Before this, a lot of our scripts and apps, we were
able to develop by ourselves. They were small enough we could handle that. But when you
multiply your workload by 9x, you're going to need some help. And when you're working
with others, it's really good to kind of remember golden rule. Coding with others, it's sort
of like when people come to visit your house. You got to clean up and put on real pants.
And first and foremost, you're going to use version control. And you may have heard of
Git before. You may have seen it with packages on CRAN where the source code is. But I think
what doesn't get enough attention is the workflow and the branching strategies. You don't want
to be working on a single branch because I guarantee you, if you do, somebody will make
a commit that will break the code and it will be five minutes before you're supposed to
give a demo. Now there's many options, but for us, we went with a modified Git flow.
And this means at the very low level, we have feature branches. And this is where we're
doing a lot of the work. We're doing the experimentations. Things can break and that's fine because they're
isolated. But then we merge them back into our development branch. This is kind of the
functioning application. This is our working copy of the app. And as we test and develop
that more and it's ready, we then merge that into our master branch. And that master branch
is what gets deployed into production. And to get there, you have to document, test and
absolutely repeat. So Roxygen makes it so easy to code and have that documentation right
there in the same place. And then you can render in a much more even user-friendly version.
Testing, that's also a form of documentation that gives examples on how to use your code.
And of course, both of these together allows people in the future to make changes to your
code much more rapidly and know that they aren't breaking core functionality. And you
may be used to or familiar with unit testing. This is the test that, the R unit, the tiny
test. But there's also even more testing beyond that. There's the UI testing. Get users to
actually try your application out, see if they can do something useful with it or automate
some of that with Shiny test. And then there's the one that probably gets the least attention,
load testing. For us, a lot of our scripts and applications were running on local computers.
We have one user at most. But when you start to put something in a production environment,
you're likely going to have concurrent users and your application is going to run differently
with 10 users than it will with one. And it might run even more different with 10,000
users. You can absolutely scale up to 10,000 users, but you definitely want to test it
before you do. And to get there, you really want to just take advantage of R's natural
coding structure. Take advantage of the fact that functions, packages and Shiny modules
naturally lend itself to the division of labor. So one person can focus in on the
details of a function and it's abstracted for the rest of everyone on the team. They
just need to know how to call that function. And that's exactly what we did with our application.
At the top level, we have the CPV reporting app. And of course, that relies on a bunch
of common packages, right? dplyr, purr, and of course, Shiny. But for us, we also created
four custom packages. We have the one that connects to our analytics platform, Mantis
DBC. We have CPV reporter that actually compiles everything into that PDF. We have accelerator
that will take the data and output it in a reusable format if people want to do additional
calculations. And then we have PPXQC that does our calculations in the report, creates
the control charts, calculates the run rules, creates histograms. And the beauty of this
approach is that now you've put all this effort into creating this code, you've industrialized
it, you've tested it, you've documented it, and you get to reuse it for other applications.
As much as we have users who use the reporting app, we also have tons of data scientists
and our users in our manufacturing division that are now much more easily able to connect
to our analytics platform. And I get emails probably once a week about this. And it's
great that they're able to reuse something we already created. Next, I want to talk about
environments. See, US President Woodrow Wilson once said, if you want to make enemies, try
to change something. Data scientist Marcus Adams says, if you want to make errors, try
to change environments. Because when you talk about a production environment, that implies
that there is also a non-production environment. And you may have more or less than what's
shown here. You have dev, test, prod, you may also have a QC environment. But the important
thing is you want to separate from where you're making changes to where people are
actually using your code. You don't want to be testing things out, you know, tweaking
things here and there all the time. When you're in a production environment, you have a certain
level of stability, right? And as you move from development test to production, you want
things to be more controlled, more tested, more stable. People have to be able to rely
on this app to be there and work in a consistent manner. And I'll say something that's a little
more contentious. There are no production apps. There are only apps in a production
environment. And that production environment, you have to define its requirements. And those
requirements come from how you're going to use your application. Now, maybe you have
loose requirements and low expectations, kind of like going to a care talk show. But for
us who are using it in a GMP manner, we have to have things like audit trails, timeouts,
things like change control. My point is, though, you want to get away from this abstract
mythical land of production, right? This will lead you to arguments about whether R is ready
for production. And it moves you into these very specifics that you can start to articulate
exactly how you're going to satisfy these requirements. And you can take your focus
and make it on industrialization and generalization of your code. And more importantly, you can
start to tackle the seven circles of R reproducibility hell. I know what you're asking. You're thinking,
why does Beelzebub have an R tattoo across his chest? I don't know. I would have assumed
that Dark Lord would be more closely associated with Python, but maybe he lost a bet to the
archangel Gabriel. I don't know. But here we are. And as Dante begins his descent, he
first comes across the code version. That is the code you write and is maintained by
Git. Or if not by Git, this is your final version or version final, final, final, final 2.0.
And that top-level code itself will rely on certain versions of packages. These are your
top-level packages. Is it dplyr 1.0 or dplyr 0.8? And each of these packages, in turn,
have dependencies, right? And these are all the names that you don't really ever pay attention
to as they're scrolling by when you install a package. BH, Farva, Scales. But each of
them also have a version they require. And those all run on top of an R language version.
Are you using R3.5 or R4.0? There are breaking changes between those. And moving down, there's
the runtime environment. And I think this is the most underappreciated one. So certainly
you want to manage environment variables, things like proxy settings. But you also have
to think, there's differences between running in an interactive mode and running in batch.
When you don't have access to the console, it makes a difference whether you're running
your application out of RStudio or running it on the Shiny server. And then from there,
you also have external dependencies. These are your system's libraries. Think about trying
to install R Java. You have to have that JDK installed as well. Or if you've ever had the
pleasure of trying to install a tech to make sure you can generate those PDF reports. And
then the innermost circle is our operating system. Code runs differently between Windows
and Mac and between Mac and Linux and Linux and Windows. That's why some packages don't
work on all operating systems. A simple example would be that they use different path separators,
you know, backslash or forward slash. But then there's also more subtle things like
how they render visualizations. And I can tell you that we faced every one of these
circles in our journey. But I'll give you one example now. See, here are some wonderful
control charts. And on the left, we have the version in the development server. And on
the right, we have the version on our test server. Identical code, but no errors, no
warnings and most importantly, no resplendent dark green line that shows the mean of the
data. Now, I want to point out that this is a dark space green line. And that's important
because officially there shouldn't be a space there. However, we were using this code for
years before we actually even deployed it to the development server. And it worked.
So you've got to be asking yourself, how does a single space pose such an existential threat
to our application? Well, like most things in life, timing is critical. You see, when
you specify version requirements for your packages, everything downstream of that kind
of sits in this quantum superpositions, right? The actual versions that will get installed
doesn't happen to actually install those packages. So our PPX2C package relied on gplot2, of
course, right? And then turn required scales. Now, before October, sorry, November 19, 2019,
it resolved to scales 1.0. That could handle our dark space green. After November 19, 2019,
it resolved to scales 1.1. And that changed how it translated that string into a numeric
value to represent that color. And inadvertently broke backwards compatibility. We just so
happened to deploy to test in late November 2019. Now, we caught that because we ran tests
like we should. But I'll tell you, PackRap wasn't sufficient to catch this. We tried.
What we really needed here was CRAN snapshots, either from Microsoft's CRAN snapshots, RStudio
Package Manager, or even internal CRAN snapshots. And to give the cherry on top of this, and
a testament to really great package maintainers, this problem only existed about a month. By
mid-January, this was solved. And so the moral of the story is, don't deploy early. Let the
package maintainers fix everything first. Now, lastly, I want to say, if you can't run
your app without direct intervention, it was never an app to start with. Your app will
suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. And by that, I mean crazy input you
never expected users to have. You know, like 12 digits of precision. Your code has to be
robust to survive the thousand natural shocks the app is heir to. And it has to do it without
your direct intervention. But just because you can't directly intervene doesn't mean
the app can't collect information for you. First and foremost, log. There's plenty of
programs out there that help you with this. Feudal.logger, Logger4R, Logging. It's one
thing to log errors in the crashes in the stack trace when that happens, but you also
want context. Your app is kind of like a kid, too. You don't want just your teachers calling
you when something bad happens. You want to know the good things that happen. You want
to know how people are using it. What are they submitting? What are the queries they're
looking for? And you know what? It's kind of like your child. It really is, because
you put a lot of work into it. And so like a good child, also make it call home. Use
things like Google Analytics to let you know who and where this app is being used. Google
Analytics tags are fairly simple to copy some JavaScript into your UI code, and then you
get to see all these analytics about how your code is being used. You can see peak volumes.
You can see what time of year this application is being used. Maybe you want to scale up
your production servers. And lastly, you may actually want to have your application
adopt to its environment. There's some great packages out there that allow you to do just
this. The config and secrets package are just that. In a simple example, for us, we needed
to show a banner in our dev and test environment that said, this is not for official use. But
more complex for us was password management between the environments. You see, for us,
each of our environments, we had a service account, and that service account had a password
that connected to a different database for each environment. And our dev environment
should not have access to our production environment database, and our production environment should
not have access to our dev database. Furthermore, it was a security requirement that we could
not store these passwords in clear text. And I'll say this, that credentials and secrets
management is such a deep topic. I am by no means an expert on it, but I'll only share
what we did, because that solution was inspired by a hallway conversation I had with the R
podcaster himself, Eric Nance, at R Pharma 2019. When our client, the UI, contacts our
server, we look at the domain, the URL requested, specifically the subdomain. And this is great,
because we actually have multiple production servers sitting behind an application load
balancer. And so by looking at that subdomain, is it shiny dev, shiny test, or just shiny
for a production environment, we can then use the config package to go grab the correct
parameters from a YAML file. Specifically for us, that is the ID of the service account,
the database to which we should connect, and the name of the secret in our vault that holds
the password. See, we've encrypted those passwords in the vault, and with the server's individual
private SSH keys, they can decrypt that password and use that to go grab the data from the
correct database. And this is really useful, because we can encrypt the password and make
a commit to our Git repository. And only a few developers need to know those passwords,
and only those servers, when we deploy them, should be able to access those passwords.
Rotating the passwords, we just make a pull request with the updated password, and that
can be deployed out to the proper server. And I get it, password management is not exciting.
But deploying is. It is totally worth it. And I admit, my head jerks every time I hear
the word production in a presentation title. But getting there is not all natural language
processing and random forest. And hopefully you realize by now, actually most of getting
there is not. What I've talked about today really only even scratches the surface. Just
know though, you can use R and Shiny in a production environment. We are not even the
first to do so. Just last year, Heather and Jacqueline Nullis at RStudioConf talked about
how T-Mobile does it. We are just yet another example of how you can do it. And if you need
to, name drop. We are a Fortune 500 company, and we are using it for a very important reporting
process. Look, putting a Shiny app into production is kind of like playing the old computer game,
the Oregon Trail. Now, you're not guaranteed to succeed. It might not be pretty, and it
might be hard, but it can be done. Others have done it before you. You just need to
figure out how to do it. And of course, avoid dysentery. But that's good advice even beyond
having Shiny applications. And like those pioneers crossing the Rocky Mountains, we
too have crossed over, figured out how, and reached the top of the mountain of production.
And as we look out over this vista, I'll leave you with these words. You can't always code
what you want, but if you build sometimes, you might just find you code what you need.
Thank you for your time. I hope you got something you needed from this talk, and I hope you
enjoy the rest of the conference. Thank you.